## Introduction

Hello and welcome to my data analysis portfolio page! My name is Daniel Weinstein, and I'm a current student in the Master of Public Administration (MPA) program at SUNY Albany. I entered this program after switching from a career as a pharmaceutical scientist because I wanted to apply my analytical skills and scientific rigor to public-sector issues. Perhaps as no surprise, given my strong mathematical background, as I explored topics through my internships and coursework I gravitated towards opportunities to apply research and data analysis. I took up the Information Technology Management concentration in my MPA program, which funnels strategic thinking, stakeholder management, and data analytics to improve and optimize public organizations' computer systems.

The class "Data Science for the Public Good," which prompted me to build this portfolio, cemented the key distinctions a public-sector IT manager or data analyst must bear in mind compared to their private-sector counterparts. Namely, we are beholden to and measured by our impacts on the public or society as a whole. We kept this in mind as we discussed the applications (or misapplications) of data science, algorithms, and artificial intelligence in governments and non-profits. We talked about internal considerations, such as an organization's data governance and data management considerations, or the pipeline by which they move and transform raw collected data into useful information from which to glean insights. We also talked about external considerations - how do we ensure an organization's internal application of data to problems does not ingrain societal biases and considers a wide range of necessary contexts (social, cultural, economic, etc.) when approaching problems of massive scales, such as poverty, violence, and public health concerns.

But also, I appreciated this course for its attempts to combine both traditional public administration research and approaches with technical skills for data science and data analytics. To that end, I familiarized myself with python libraries commonly used in data analytics. This portfolio also allowed me to expand my knowledge of programs like Tableau and other languages such as SQL.

Another value this class imparted on me was the extreme importance of subject matter knowledge when collecting, cleaning, analyzing, and presenting data and findings. Being employed at the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles myself, and being a pragmatist at heart, I chose to do my projects using vehicle/traffic data from state and federal sources, looking at topics ranging including socioeconomic trends, law enforcement measures, and public health concerns (from a traffic safety perspective) while varying the tools I used between SQL, Python, and Tableau.

I hope you'll find these projects interesting and informative, and that they may prompt you to ask further questions of your own that aim towards improving our collective welfare. Thank you!

## Projects

<a href="https://github.com/DSWeins676/RPAD676Final/tree/main/IncomeDriven"> 1. Income Driven: Exploring Relationships Between Vehicles and Household Income in New York State </a>

Personal vehicles are essential for both work and leisure, especially when public transportation is not readily available. However, vehicles also impose significant costs, in both purchase and upkeep, on their owners, and this burden is felt more for households/families in lower socioeconomic brackets. Using a combination of New York State Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) vehicle registration data and demographic/economic data from the U.S. Census Bureau, this project seeks to explore trends in vehicle ownership as well as relationships between vehicles and socioeconomic indicators across geographic locations in New York State. This may reveal trends that guide further research and analysis directions about the state of vehicles in New York.

<a href="https://github.com/DSWeins676/RPAD676Final/tree/main/NY_Scofflaws"> 2. Scoffing the Law: New York State Enforcement Measures Applied to Vehicle Registrations </a>

Local jurisdictions and state agencies use different penalties for various infractions to enforce compliance with New York State's Vehicle and Traffic Law (VTL). Some of these apply to one's driving privilege, while some apply to a vehicle's registration, and others apply to both. Registration penalties can occur due to issues such as failing to keep current automobile insurance, frequently violating parking codes or automated traffic safety measures (i.e. red light cameras) without paying their associated fees, or failing to pay outstanding bridge/tunnel/thruway tolls. Using publicly available vehicle registration data from the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, which has the authority to place these penalties, I created a Tableau dashboard to explore the frequency of registration enforcement measures, both as a total and as a percent of total vehicles, either within the entire state or filtered by one or multiple county/counties. The dashboard also displays the frequency of these enforcement measures grouped by the affected vehicle's make. This visualization could reveal trends and tendencies in both the frequency with which drivers infringe some of these laws or fail to pay their fines, as well as the frequency with which local governments pursue these enforcement mechanisms against drivers. Further exploration could help determine the causes of higher infraction rates in certain areas, which could then guide future policies, enforcement efforts, or awareness campaigns to increase compliance and ensure New York's drivers can continue using their vehicles without interruption.

<a href="https://github.com/DSWeins676/RPAD676Final/tree/main/FARS_Crashes">3. Placeholder </a>

The killing of pedestrians, cyclists, and other users of micromobility devices by motor vehicles has been an increasingly pressing issue. Various city and local governments have pursued "Vision Zero" campaigns to implement systems to prevent all traffic-related deaths. A core focus of a Vision Zero project is strategically targeting resources and efforts towards groups, either of people or places, that have the highest risk for causing traffic-related fatalities. In this analysis, I utilize the data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) to identify risk factors associated with traffic fatalities, focusing on the fatalities of non-motorists caused by a motor vehicle in some capacity.
